README.md, before:

<p align="center"><a href="https://www.ipglobal.es" target="_blank"><img src="https://www.ipglobal.es/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/logo-ipg-techhub.png" width="400" alt="Ipglobal : Tech Hub"></a></p>

<p align="center">
<a href="https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg" alt="License"></a>
<a href="https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test"><img src="https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg" alt="Build status"></a>
<a href="https://codecov.io/gh/olml89/IPGlobal-test"><img src="https://codecov.io/gh/olml89/IPGlobal-test/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=SL6ANXRH0A" alt="Coverage status"></a>
</p>

# Requirements

Implementation using 
**[Laravel 10](https://laravel.com)** 
of a Blog application prototype with two functionalities:

- Page listing the existing posts
- Individual post page, showing the post information and a brief sheet about the author

The blog has to expose a public API with two endpoints:

- **GET /posts/{id}** to get the information of a post, including the author's data
- **POST /posts** to publish new posts

You can consult the full specifications in spanish in the 
[original document](https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/blob/master/docs/specifications.pdf).

# Application overview

The application has been structured following a DDD pattern. The infrastructure layer receives a request
(through an HTTP request or a CLI command) that is mapped into a Laravel controller or an Artisan
command, that calls a use case sitting in the application layer.

That point is the separation between our application and the framework, so the use cases would be
reusable if some day decided to change the framework. They are also reusable between input ports, so the 
same use case can be shared by a controller, a command or whatever infrastructure point of entry that has 
to perform the same task into our application.

The use case works directly with domain entities and services. The domain services are commonly interfaces
that are then implemented in the infrastructure layer. This way we don't depend on third-party vendors
to develop our domain actions. Each use case returns an application layer result, 
which is a DataTransferObject (or an array of them) which consists on scalars or ValueObjects, 
also consisting on scalars. The ValueObjects sit in the model, but as they come into the results
the infrastructure layer never speaks directly with our domain.

## Phase 1: Prototype

On this early stage I installed 
**[laravel/framework 10.0](https://github.com/laravel/framework)**, 
organized the application to follow a DDD directory structure and 
developed a prototype with two mock functionalities, post publishing and post retrieval. The post publishing
one only showed a 201 response after validating the input data, and the retrieving feature got the data from the
remote JsonPlaceholderApi.

Steps:

- Validate the input when publishing a post (verifying no parameters were missing
and the user_id represented a valid auto-incremental id).

- Handle the errors when trying to get a post that didn't exist on JsonApiPlaceholder.

- Manipulate the JsonApiPlaceholder response to include the user information inside the post response
instead of simply showing the user_id field.

- As the post entity changes to allocate a user entity, mock some user data when publishing a post 
and display it as it was the post's author information.

## Phase 2: Persistence

The next step was to implement persistence, so I installed
**[doctrine/orm 3.0](https://github.com/doctrine/orm)**
as I prefer it to Eloquent.
I also installed
**[doctrine/migrations 3.6](https://github.com/doctrine/migrations)**
in order to generate the database schema automatically from 
my entity mappings, but I had to develop a thin wrapper around it to be able to run its commands from artisan
and use the already configured connection in the application. 

On this stage I decided to change the auto-incremental entities id for a UUID as it is a strategy more decoupled
from the persistence infrastructure.

Steps:

- Refactor the post creation feature to persist the information in the database (still with a mocked user).

- Implement a feature to register users through a console command (at first specifying all its parameters, later 
on develop another command that only asks for email and password and mocks random dummy data for the rest
of the parameters).

- Refactor the post retrieval feature to get it from the database (with the mocked user attached).

Even though I had no more use for the JsonPlaceholderApi post retriever at this point, I still left it in 
a separate use case as a proof of concept (however, I had to do some adjustments to it, as the format of 
their ids and ours is incompatible now).

## Phase 3: Authentication

With the post creation and retrieval features working, the only thing that's left regarding the API is to 
provide a mechanism to publish a post with its real author information instead of a mocked user one's. So
what I've done is developing a very simple authentication process where the user credentials are checked
against an endpoint that returns an Api token valid for an hour if they are correct.

Using this token in a header, we can check which user is performing the request to publish a post and then
attach it automatically to the created post.

Steps:

- Implement a feature to check the user credentials and generate an Api token.

- Refactor the post publishing feature to need a valid Api token in order to perform the action.

- Implement a feature to enforce the incoming data to be in JSON format.

- Document the api using the
**[OpenApi 3.0.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.0)**
standard through
**[darkaonline/l5-swagger 8.5](https://github.com/DarkaOnLine/L5-Swagger)**

## Phase 4: Front-end

As most of the use cases have been already developed, this doesn't take too much effort. I developed
two views, one to display the list of posts and another one to display the post information,
including the author's data. I modeled them with some dummy data using webpack through
**[laravel-mix 6.0](https://www.npmjs.com/package/laravel-mix)**
(I had to install it with npm as Laravel 10 comes by default with
**[vite 4.0](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vite)**).

Then I implemented two web controllers and had them retrieve the needed information and pass it to
the already created views. The use case to retrieve a post already existed, so I only had to create
the post listing use case and implement the needed method into the post repository and that was it.

Steps:

- Develop two views, one for each web functionality.

- Implement the two web controllers and create the post listing use case.

## Phase 5: Things left

Or what I'd do if I had more time to complete the test. For sure, one thing would be to implement a nice
testing environment. The features are currently tested (on local) but they use the same persistence
environment than the application, so each time you run the test the database is polluted with test data.

Also, this is a problem with the
**[build-test](https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/actions/workflows/build.yml)**
GitHub Action to implement a CI flow, the tests passed smoothly and uploaded the Codecov.io
code coverage % badge until I started testing features involving persistence, as the database
connection for the testing environment is not properly configured the action fails.

# How to use it

First you have to install the application with its dependencies:

````php
composer install
````


Then you will have to generate the database schema:

````php
php artisan doctrine:migrations:migrate
````


After that you can start creating new users:

````php
php artisan user:create
        {password}
        {name}
        {username}
        {email}
        {address_street}
        {address_suite}
        {address_city}
        {address_zipcode}
        {address_geo_lat}
        {address_geo_lng}
        {phone}
        {website}
        {company_name}
        {company_catchphrase}
        {company_bs}
````


Or if you prefer to skip specifying all the parameters and to create a random
user setting only **email** and **password**:

````php
php artisan user:create:random {email} {password}
````


Using the credentials of the user, now you can get an Api authentication token:

#### Expect code 200 and an authentication token     
**POST** /api/auth     
**Content-Type**: application/json     

```http
   
   Body
    {
        "email": "created.user@test.com",
        "password": "12345" 
    }
   
   Response
    {
        "user_id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
        "token": "2437d1dc0ea2921dcd1a0a27fcf0debb",
        "expires_at": "2023-03-16 17:42:14"
    }
```


This allows you to create new posts:

#### Expect code 201 and info about the created post    
**POST** /api/posts    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
**Api-Token**: 2437d1dc0ea2921dcd1a0a27fcf0debb    

```http
   
   Body
    {
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua." 
    }
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89",
        "user": {
            "id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
            "name": "Mara Stark",
            "username": "Teagan Sipes",
            "email": "johndeere@gmail.com",
            "address": {
                "street": "5355 Schuster Stream",
                "suite": "Josefina Lowe V",
                "city": "Camrenside",
                "zipCode": "20982",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -49.310189,
                    "longitude": 155.665459
                }
            },
            "phone": "1-574-438-9850",
            "website": "http://moen.com/",
            "company": {
                "name": "Miss Gia Stamm",
                "catchphrase": "Dolores sed quia ipsum voluptas dignissimos et quisquam.",
                "bs": "Ab fugit rem explicabo eos porro eius."
            }
        },
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:24:44+00:00"
    }
```


You can also retrieve published posts (no matter who the author is):

#### Expect code 200 and info about the requested post    
**GET** /api/posts/85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
(No need for the Api-Token)

```http
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89",
        "user": {
            "id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
            "name": "Mara Stark",
            "username": "Teagan Sipes",
            "email": "johndeere@gmail.com",
            "address": {
                "street": "5355 Schuster Stream",
                "suite": "Josefina Lowe V",
                "city": "Camrenside",
                "zipCode": "20982",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -49.310189,
                    "longitude": 155.665459
                }
            },
            "phone": "1-574-438-9850",
            "website": "http://moen.com/",
            "company": {
                "name": "Miss Gia Stamm",
                "catchphrase": "Dolores sed quia ipsum voluptas dignissimos et quisquam.",
                "bs": "Ab fugit rem explicabo eos porro eius."
            }
        },
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:24:44+00:00"
    }
```

As a legacy feature, you can still get remote JsonPlaceholderApi posts, but the id's of the 
post and the user will be mocked and generated randomly and the posted_at field will be set to the 
time of the request.

You will see the next example matches with [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/12](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/12)
and that the user information corresponds to [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/2](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/2):

#### Expect code 200 and info about the requested post in JsonPlaceholderApi    
**GET** /api/jsonapi/posts/12    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
(No need for the Api-Token) 

```http
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "88e0e8c7-74f0-48d9-9199-1339a98c035d",
        "user": {
            "id": "d2d3ff36-b0cc-44c3-bdef-2a8e9befd42f",
            "name": "Ervin Howell",
            "username": "Antonette",
            "email": "Shanna@melissa.tv",
            "address": {
                "street": "Victor Plains",
                "suite": "Suite 879",
                "city": "Wisokyburgh",
                "zipCode": "90566-7771",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -43.9509,
                    "longitude": -34.4618
                }
            },
            "phone": "010-692-6593 x09125",
            "website": "https://anastasia.net",
            "company": {
                "name": "Deckow-Crist",
                "catchphrase": "Proactive didactic contingency",
                "bs": "synergize scalable supply-chains"
            }
        },
        "title": "in quibusdam tempore odit est dolorem",
        "body": "itaque id aut magnam\npraesentium quia et ea odit et ea voluptas et\nsapiente quia nihil amet occaecati quia id voluptatem\nincidunt ea est distinctio odio",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:33:30+00:00"
    }
```

A full **OpenApi 3.0** based api documentation can be consulted at **/api/documentation** using **Swagger** 
once the application is installed, but you can read the raw 
[yml specification file](https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/blob/master/docs/api.yml)
if you prefer it.

Commit message:

Fix GitHub build-test.yml action to set up a testing database there and update .README

README.md, after:

<p align="center"><a href="https://www.ipglobal.es" target="_blank"><img src="https://www.ipglobal.es/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/logo-ipg-techhub.png" width="400" alt="Ipglobal : Tech Hub"></a></p>

<p align="center">
<a href="https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg" alt="License"></a>
<a href="https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test"><img src="https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg" alt="Build status"></a>
<a href="https://codecov.io/gh/olml89/IPGlobal-test"><img src="https://codecov.io/gh/olml89/IPGlobal-test/branch/master/graph/badge.svg?token=SL6ANXRH0A" alt="Coverage status"></a>
</p>

# Requirements

Implementation using 
**[Laravel 10](https://laravel.com)** 
of a Blog application prototype with two functionalities:

- Page listing the existing posts
- Individual post page, showing the post information and a brief sheet about the author

The blog has to expose a public API with two endpoints:

- **GET /posts/{id}** to get the information of a post, including the author's data
- **POST /posts** to publish new posts

You can consult the full specifications in spanish in the 
[original document](https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/blob/master/docs/specifications.pdf).

# Application overview

The application has been structured following a DDD pattern. The infrastructure layer receives a request
(through an HTTP request or a CLI command) that is mapped into a Laravel controller or an Artisan
command, that calls a use case sitting in the application layer.

That point is the separation between our application and the framework, so the use cases would be
reusable if some day decided to change the framework. They are also reusable between input ports, so the 
same use case can be shared by a controller, a command or whatever infrastructure point of entry that has 
to perform the same task into our application.

The use case works directly with domain entities and services. The domain services are commonly interfaces
that are then implemented in the infrastructure layer. This way we don't depend on third-party vendors
to develop our domain actions. Each use case returns an application layer result, 
which is a DataTransferObject (or an array of them) which consists on scalars or ValueObjects, 
also consisting on scalars. The ValueObjects sit in the model, but as they come into the results
the infrastructure layer never speaks directly with our domain.

## Phase 1: Prototype

On this early stage I installed 
**[laravel/framework 10.0](https://github.com/laravel/framework)**, 
organized the application to follow a DDD directory structure and 
developed a prototype with two mock functionalities, post publishing and post retrieval. The post publishing
one only showed a 201 response after validating the input data, and the retrieving feature got the data from the
remote JsonPlaceholderApi.

Steps:

- Validate the input when publishing a post (verifying no parameters were missing
and the user_id represented a valid auto-incremental id).

- Handle the errors when trying to get a post that didn't exist on JsonApiPlaceholder.

- Manipulate the JsonApiPlaceholder response to include the user information inside the post response
instead of simply showing the user_id field.

- As the post entity changes to allocate a user entity, mock some user data when publishing a post 
and display it as it was the post's author information.

## Phase 2: Persistence

The next step was to implement persistence, so I installed
**[doctrine/orm 3.0](https://github.com/doctrine/orm)**
as I prefer it to Eloquent.
I also installed
**[doctrine/migrations 3.6](https://github.com/doctrine/migrations)**
in order to generate the database schema automatically from 
my entity mappings, but I had to develop a thin wrapper around it to be able to run its commands from artisan
and use the already configured connection in the application. 

On this stage I decided to change the auto-incremental entities id for a UUID as it is a strategy more decoupled
from the persistence infrastructure.

Steps:

- Refactor the post creation feature to persist the information in the database (still with a mocked user).

- Implement a feature to register users through a console command (at first specifying all its parameters, later 
on develop another command that only asks for email and password and mocks random dummy data for the rest
of the parameters).

- Refactor the post retrieval feature to get it from the database (with the mocked user attached).

Even though I had no more use for the JsonPlaceholderApi post retriever at this point, I still left it in 
a separate use case as a proof of concept (however, I had to do some adjustments to it, as the format of 
their ids and ours is incompatible now).

## Phase 3: Authentication

With the post creation and retrieval features working, the only thing that's left regarding the API is to 
provide a mechanism to publish a post with its real author information instead of a mocked user one's. So
what I've done is developing a very simple authentication process where the user credentials are checked
against an endpoint that returns an Api token valid for an hour if they are correct.

Using this token in a header, we can check which user is performing the request to publish a post and then
attach it automatically to the created post.

Steps:

- Implement a feature to check the user credentials and generate an Api token.

- Refactor the post publishing feature to need a valid Api token in order to perform the action.

- Implement a feature to enforce the incoming data to be in JSON format.

- Document the api using the
**[OpenApi 3.0.0](https://spec.openapis.org/oas/v3.0.0)**
standard through
**[darkaonline/l5-swagger 8.5](https://github.com/DarkaOnLine/L5-Swagger)**

## Phase 4: Front-end

As most of the use cases have been already developed, this doesn't take too much effort. I developed
two views, one to display the list of posts and another one to display the post information,
including the author's data. I modeled them with some dummy data using webpack through
**[laravel-mix 6.0](https://www.npmjs.com/package/laravel-mix)**
(I had to install it with npm as Laravel 10 comes by default with
**[vite 4.0](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vite)**).

Then I implemented two web controllers and had them retrieve the needed information and pass it to
the already created views. The use case to retrieve a post already existed, so I only had to create
the post listing use case and implement the needed method into the post repository and that was it.

Steps:

- Develop two views, one for each web functionality.

- Implement the two web controllers and create the post listing use case.

## Phase 5: Improvement of testing

The initial tests didn't test the persistence layer as the application didn't have one, as it grew and relied on a
database I had to integrate that part. Then I had to set up a different database set up for the testing environment
in order to not pollute the application database with mocked test data, and to seed the testing database with the
needed data and clean it before every test, so every one of them is idempotent.

The last part was to set up the CI GitHub Action that builds the app to set up a database testing environment 
already there, because until I did this the tests passed correctly on local environment but failed there.

Steps:

- Implement a separate database for testing environment on local

- Implement a database testing environment on GitHub actions

# How to use it

First you have to install the application with its dependencies:

````php
composer install
````


Then you will have to generate the database schema:

````php
php artisan doctrine:migrations:migrate
````


After that you can start creating new users:

````php
php artisan user:create
        {password}
        {name}
        {username}
        {email}
        {address_street}
        {address_suite}
        {address_city}
        {address_zipcode}
        {address_geo_lat}
        {address_geo_lng}
        {phone}
        {website}
        {company_name}
        {company_catchphrase}
        {company_bs}
````


Or if you prefer to skip specifying all the parameters and to create a random
user setting only **email** and **password**:

````php
php artisan user:create:random {email} {password}
````


Using the credentials of the user, now you can get an Api authentication token:

#### Expect code 200 and an authentication token     
**POST** /api/auth     
**Content-Type**: application/json     

```http
   
   Body
    {
        "email": "created.user@test.com",
        "password": "12345" 
    }
   
   Response
    {
        "user_id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
        "token": "2437d1dc0ea2921dcd1a0a27fcf0debb",
        "expires_at": "2023-03-16 17:42:14"
    }
```


This allows you to create new posts:

#### Expect code 201 and info about the created post    
**POST** /api/posts    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
**Api-Token**: 2437d1dc0ea2921dcd1a0a27fcf0debb    

```http
   
   Body
    {
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua." 
    }
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89",
        "user": {
            "id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
            "name": "Mara Stark",
            "username": "Teagan Sipes",
            "email": "johndeere@gmail.com",
            "address": {
                "street": "5355 Schuster Stream",
                "suite": "Josefina Lowe V",
                "city": "Camrenside",
                "zipCode": "20982",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -49.310189,
                    "longitude": 155.665459
                }
            },
            "phone": "1-574-438-9850",
            "website": "http://moen.com/",
            "company": {
                "name": "Miss Gia Stamm",
                "catchphrase": "Dolores sed quia ipsum voluptas dignissimos et quisquam.",
                "bs": "Ab fugit rem explicabo eos porro eius."
            }
        },
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:24:44+00:00"
    }
```


You can also retrieve published posts (no matter who the author is):

#### Expect code 200 and info about the requested post    
**GET** /api/posts/85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
(No need for the Api-Token)

```http
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "85e9ff5a-b601-4e4c-9946-d1050d1c1c89",
        "user": {
            "id": "a114298d-14c9-3f06-bd51-282d1e985c6e",
            "name": "Mara Stark",
            "username": "Teagan Sipes",
            "email": "johndeere@gmail.com",
            "address": {
                "street": "5355 Schuster Stream",
                "suite": "Josefina Lowe V",
                "city": "Camrenside",
                "zipCode": "20982",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -49.310189,
                    "longitude": 155.665459
                }
            },
            "phone": "1-574-438-9850",
            "website": "http://moen.com/",
            "company": {
                "name": "Miss Gia Stamm",
                "catchphrase": "Dolores sed quia ipsum voluptas dignissimos et quisquam.",
                "bs": "Ab fugit rem explicabo eos porro eius."
            }
        },
        "title": "This is a random post",
        "body": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:24:44+00:00"
    }
```

As a legacy feature, you can still get remote JsonPlaceholderApi posts, but the id's of the 
post and the user will be mocked and generated randomly and the posted_at field will be set to the 
time of the request.

You will see the next example matches with [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/12](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/posts/12)
and that the user information corresponds to [https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/2](https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/users/2):

#### Expect code 200 and info about the requested post in JsonPlaceholderApi    
**GET** /api/jsonapi/posts/12    
**Content-Type**: application/json    
(No need for the Api-Token) 

```http
   
   Response
    {
        "id": "88e0e8c7-74f0-48d9-9199-1339a98c035d",
        "user": {
            "id": "d2d3ff36-b0cc-44c3-bdef-2a8e9befd42f",
            "name": "Ervin Howell",
            "username": "Antonette",
            "email": "Shanna@melissa.tv",
            "address": {
                "street": "Victor Plains",
                "suite": "Suite 879",
                "city": "Wisokyburgh",
                "zipCode": "90566-7771",
                "geoLocation": {
                    "latitude": -43.9509,
                    "longitude": -34.4618
                }
            },
            "phone": "010-692-6593 x09125",
            "website": "https://anastasia.net",
            "company": {
                "name": "Deckow-Crist",
                "catchphrase": "Proactive didactic contingency",
                "bs": "synergize scalable supply-chains"
            }
        },
        "title": "in quibusdam tempore odit est dolorem",
        "body": "itaque id aut magnam\npraesentium quia et ea odit et ea voluptas et\nsapiente quia nihil amet occaecati quia id voluptatem\nincidunt ea est distinctio odio",
        "posted_at": "2023-03-18T20:33:30+00:00"
    }
```

A full **OpenApi 3.0** based api documentation can be consulted at **/api/documentation** using **Swagger** 
once the application is installed, but you can read the raw 
[yml specification file](https://github.com/olml89/IPGlobal-test/blob/master/docs/api.yml)
if you prefer it.
